README.md, before:

# ActiveRecord Costume Store

## Contents

|Section                           |
|----------------------------------|
|[Objectives](#objectives)         |
|[ActiveRecord](#activerecord)     |
|[Example](#example)               |
|[Instructions](#instructions)     |
|[Resources](#resources)           |

## Objectives

![jack o lantern emoji](http://www.emoji-cheat-sheet.com/graphics/emojis/jack_o_lantern.png) ![dog ghost emoji](http://www.emoji-cheat-sheet.com/graphics/emojis/ghost.png) ![jack o lantern emoji](http://www.emoji-cheat-sheet.com/graphics/emojis/jack_o_lantern.png)

For this morning's todo, you'll be creating the following tables: 'costumes','costume_stores', and 'haunted_houses'. You be creating the following classes: `Costume`, `CostumeStore`, and `HauntedHouse`.

The `costumes` table will have four columns:
  1. name
  2. price
  3. size

The `costume_stores` table will have seven columns:
  1. name
  2. location
  3. number of costumes, or "costume inventory"

The `haunted_houses` table will have eight columns:
  1. name
  2. location
  3. theme

Before coding out the creation of these tables, read about ActiveRecord below:

## ActiveRecord

ActiveRecord is magic. Well, not really. But it does build out a bunch of methods for you. For instance, when it's used properly it will give you access to methods such as `create`, `save`, and `find_by`. Rejoice! Never again will you have to manually build out these methods!

ActiveRecord allows you to create a database that interacts with your class with only a few lines of code. These lines of code go to creating a model, which resides in the `app/models` folder, and a migration, which resides in the `db/migrations` folder.

The model inherits from `ActiveRecord::Base` while the migration inherits from `ActiveRecord::Migration`. Many migrations these days have a `change` method, but you might also see migrations with an `up` and a `down` method instead. To use ActiveRecord, you have to stick to some specific naming conventions: while the migrations are plural, the models are singular. 

#### Migrations

To start, the class names in the migration files must match their file names. For instance, a class in the migration file called `20141013204115_create_candies.rb` must be named `CreateCandies` while a class in a migration file called `20130915204319_add_addresses_to_houses.rb` must be called AddAddressesToHouses. 

You might notice that in both the examples above, the numbers at the front of the file name were ignored. These numbers are in the form `YYYYMMDDHHMMSS`. Later on, these timestamps will become important as Rails uses them to determine which migration should be run and in what order. For instance, if you made a table called `dog_walkers` and then added a column to it called `rating`, that would be fine as the timestamp on the table creation would be before adding a column to it. However, if you did this in reverse order, that is adding a column to a table that doesn't exist then creating the table, you would get an error.

Migrations, as it was mentioned before, inherit from ActiveRecord::Migration and usually have a method called `change`. In change, you can create a table with the [create_table](http://guides.rubyonrails.org/migrations.html#creating-a-table) method. This method automatically will create a primary key column called `id`, but this default can be overridden if you'd like to customize it.

Here's a simple example of the `create_table` method in action:

```ruby
class CreateDogs < ActiveRecord::Migration
  def change
    create_table :dogs do |t|
      t.string :name
      t.string :breed
    end
  end
end
```

The above code would create a table called `dogs` with three columns: `name`, `breed` (both explicitly created), and an implicitly created `id` column.

Take a look at a few data types that ActiveRecord supports below:

|Data Type                      |Examples                                               |
|-------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------|
|boolean                        | true, false                                           |
|integer                        | 2, -13, 485                                           |
|string                         | "Halloween", "Boo!", strings betweeen 1-255 characters|
|datetime                       | DateTime.now, DateTime.new(2014,10,31)                |
|float                          | 2.234, 32.2124, -6.342                                |
|text                           | strings between 1 and 2 ^ 32 - 1 characters           |

#### Models

Like migrations, models also inherit, but they inherit from ActiveRecord::Base. A simple model would look like this:

```ruby
class Dog < ActiveRecord::Base
end
```

Even though there are no explicit methods to call on name and breed, because this Dog model would work with the created `dogs` table above and you would be able to call `name`, `breed`, and `id` on any new instance of the Dog class. For instance (get it?!?!):

```ruby
shiloh = Dog.new
=> #<Dog id: 1, name: nil, breed: nil>
shiloh.name = "Shiloh"
=> "Shiloh"
shiloh.breed = "Beagle"
=> "Beagle"
shiloh.save
=> true

Dog.find_by(:name => "Shiloh") == shiloh
=> true
```

Notice that you had access to reader and writer methods that cooperated with the database that you never had to actually code. You could set the name without ever writing `def name=()` and call the `self.find_by(attribute)` method without ever teaching your Dog class how to look up data in the database. It's pretty awesome. Take a look at an example below.

#### Example 

For instance, let's say you wanted to make a class called `Candy`. Candies should have two attributes, a name (string) and the number of calories (integer), you would write the migration as seen below:

`db/migrations/20130915204319_create_candies.rb`

```ruby
class CreateCandies < ActiveRecord::Migration
  def change
    create_table :products do |t|
      t.string :name
      t.integer :calories
      t.timestamps
    end
  end
end
```

Note: You might be wondering what `t.timestamps` is doing here. Well, it creates two new columns, `created_at` and `updated_at`. These are handy columns to have around as sometimes you want to query based on the time of creation or update-tion instead of querying using attributes or ids. To read more about timestamps, go to ActiveRecord's [docs on them](http://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveRecord/Timestamp.html).

While the migration was plural, the model would be singular:

`app/models/candy.rb`

```ruby
class Candy < ActiveRecord::Base
end
```

After saving the code above, running `rake db:migrate` will apply the desired changes to the database by running the change method. Then you can alter the database with simple Ruby statements.

For instance, you could create three rows in the table easily:

```ruby
Candy.create(:name => "Milky Way Midnight", :calories => 220)
Candy.create(:name => "Snickers", :calories => 550)
Candy.create(:name => "Reeeese's Peanut Batter Cups", :calories => 210)
```

Retrieving information is just as painless:

```ruby
reeses = Candy.find_by(:name => "Reeeese's Peanut Butter Cups")
# => #<Candy id: 3, name: "Reeeese's Peanut Batter Cups", calories: 210>
Candy.first
# => #<Candy id: 1, name: "Mikly Way Midnight", calories: 220>
snickers = Candy.find(2)
# => #<Candy id: 2, name: "Snickers", calories: 550>
```

As is viewing attributes:

```ruby
reeses = Candy.find(3)
# => #<Candy id: 3, name: "Reeeese's Peanut Batter Cups", calories: 210>
reeses.calories
# => 210
reeses.name
# => "Reeeese's Peanut Batter Cups"
```

Updating information and viewing table info is also quite simple:

```ruby
snickers = Candy.find(2)
# => #<Candy id: 2, name: "Snickers", calories: 550>
snickers.update(:calories => 250)
# => true

reeses = Candy.last
# => #<Candy id: 3, name: "Reeeese's Peanut Batter Cups", calories: 210>
reeses.update(:name => "Reese's Peanut Butter Cups")
# => true

Candy.find(2)
# => #<Candy id: 2, name: "Snickers", calories: 250>
Candy.last
# => #<Candy id: 3, name: "Reese's Peanut Butter Cups", calories: 210>
```

Isn't that amazing? Twelve lines of code allows you to create a table and a class that interact with each other elegantly and efficiently. It builds out methods like, `create`, `update`, `count`, `name`, `calories`, along with others such as `build` and `save`.

## Instructions

#### File Structure

You will only be altering code in six files, the three files in the `models` folder and the three files in the `db/migrations` folder.

```
├── app
│   └── models
│       ├── costume.rb
│       ├── costume_store.rb
│       └── haunted_house.rb
└──db
    └── migrations
        ├── 001_create_costumes.rb
        ├── 002_create_costume_stores.rb
        └── 003_create_haunted_houses.rb
```

#### Getting Started

**This is a test-driven lab so start with the first test and work your way down.**

**Your models should be no longer than two lines of code.**

* The first step is to run `bundle install`.
* Create the Costume class in `app/models/`.
* Fill out the ActiveRecord migration for costumes such that it passes the specs.
* Create the CostumeStore class in `app/models/`.
* Fill out the ActiveRecord migration such that it `costume_stores` the specs.
* Create the HauntedHouse class in `app/models/`.
* Fill out the ActiveRecord migration for haunted_houses such that it passes the specs.
* Remember to run `rake db:migrate` every time you create a migration. 
* Just like for any other lab, run `rspec` to view your progress.

## Resources
* [ActiveRecord Migrations](http://guides.rubyonrails.org/migrations.html)
  * Just look at the code for the example migrations
* [Creating Active Record Models](http://guides.rubyonrails.org/active_record_basics.html#creating-active-record-models) 
* [Timestamps](http://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveRecord/Timestamp.html)

Commit message:

update to use up and down in migrations

README.md, after:

# ActiveRecord Costume Store

## Contents

|Section                           |
|----------------------------------|
|[Objectives](#objectives)         |
|[ActiveRecord](#activerecord)     |
|[Example](#example)               |
|[Instructions](#instructions)     |
|[Resources](#resources)           |

## Objectives

![jack o lantern emoji](http://www.emoji-cheat-sheet.com/graphics/emojis/jack_o_lantern.png) ![dog ghost emoji](http://www.emoji-cheat-sheet.com/graphics/emojis/ghost.png) ![jack o lantern emoji](http://www.emoji-cheat-sheet.com/graphics/emojis/jack_o_lantern.png)

For this morning's todo, you'll be creating the following tables: 'costumes','costume_stores', and 'haunted_houses'. You be creating the following classes: `Costume`, `CostumeStore`, and `HauntedHouse`.

The `costumes` table will have four columns:
  1. name
  2. price
  3. size

The `costume_stores` table will have seven columns:
  1. name
  2. location
  3. number of costumes, or "costume inventory"

The `haunted_houses` table will have eight columns:
  1. name
  2. location
  3. theme

Before coding out the creation of these tables, read about ActiveRecord below:

## ActiveRecord

ActiveRecord is magic. Well, not really. But it does build out a bunch of methods for you. For instance, when it's used properly it will give you access to methods such as `create`, `save`, and `find_by`. Rejoice! Never again will you have to manually build out these methods!

ActiveRecord allows you to create a database that interacts with your class with only a few lines of code. These lines of code go to creating a model, which resides in the `app/models` folder, and a migration, which resides in the `db/migrations` folder.

The model inherits from `ActiveRecord::Base` while the migration inherits from `ActiveRecord::Migration`. Many migrations these days have a `change` method, but you might also see migrations with an `up` and a `down` method instead. To use ActiveRecord, you have to stick to some specific naming conventions: while the migrations are plural, the models are singular. 

#### Migrations

To start, the class names in the migration files must match their file names. For instance, a class in the migration file called `20141013204115_create_candies.rb` must be named `CreateCandies` while a class in a migration file called `20130915204319_add_addresses_to_houses.rb` must be called AddAddressesToHouses. 

You might notice that in both the examples above, the numbers at the front of the file name were ignored. These numbers are in the form `YYYYMMDDHHMMSS`. These timestamps will become important as ActiveRecord uses them to determine which migration should be run and in what order. For instance, if you made a table called `dog_walkers` and then added a column to it called `rating`, that would be fine as the timestamp on the table creation would be before adding a column to it. However, if you did this in reverse order, that is adding a column to a table that doesn't exist then creating the table, you would get an error.

Migrations, as it was mentioned before, inherit from ActiveRecord::Migration and have a method called `up` and a method called `down`. In `up`, you can create a table with the [create_table](http://guides.rubyonrails.org/migrations.html#creating-a-table) method. This method automatically will create a primary key column called `id`, but this default can be overridden if you'd like to customize it. Our `down` method is the reverse of `up` - it's what ActiveRecord will use to undo our migrations if needed. 

Here's a simple example of the `create_table` and `drop_table` methods in action:

```ruby
class CreateDogs < ActiveRecord::Migration
  def up
    create_table :dogs do |t|
      t.string :name
      t.string :breed
    end
  end

  def down
    drop_table :dogs
  end
end
```

The above code would create a table called `dogs` with three columns: `name`, `breed` (both explicitly created), and an implicitly created `id` column.

Take a look at a few data types that ActiveRecord supports below:

|Data Type                      |Examples                                               |
|-------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------|
|boolean                        | true, false                                           |
|integer                        | 2, -13, 485                                           |
|string                         | "Halloween", "Boo!", strings betweeen 1-255 characters|
|datetime                       | DateTime.now, DateTime.new(2014,10,31)                |
|float                          | 2.234, 32.2124, -6.342                                |
|text                           | strings between 1 and 2 ^ 32 - 1 characters           |

#### Models

Like migrations, models also inherit, but they inherit from ActiveRecord::Base. A simple model would look like this:

```ruby
class Dog < ActiveRecord::Base
end
```

Even though there are no explicit methods to call on name and breed, because this Dog model would work with the created `dogs` table above and you would be able to call `name`, `breed`, and `id` on any new instance of the Dog class. For instance (get it?!?!):

```ruby
shiloh = Dog.new
=> #<Dog id: 1, name: nil, breed: nil>
shiloh.name = "Shiloh"
=> "Shiloh"
shiloh.breed = "Beagle"
=> "Beagle"
shiloh.save
=> true

Dog.find_by(:name => "Shiloh") == shiloh
=> true
```

Notice that you had access to reader and writer methods that cooperated with the database that you never had to actually code. You could set the name without ever writing `def name=()` and call the `self.find_by(attribute)` method without ever teaching your Dog class how to look up data in the database. It's pretty awesome. Take a look at an example below.

#### Example 

For instance, let's say you wanted to make a class called `Candy`. Candies should have two attributes, a name (string) and the number of calories (integer), you would write the migration as seen below:

`db/migrations/20130915204319_create_candies.rb`

```ruby
class CreateCandies < ActiveRecord::Migration
  def up
    create_table :products do |t|
      t.string :name
      t.integer :calories
    end
  end

  def down
    drop_table :products
  end
end
```

While the migration was plural, the model would be singular:

`app/models/candy.rb`

```ruby
class Candy < ActiveRecord::Base
end
```

After saving the code above, running `rake db:migrate` will apply the desired changes to the database by running the change method. Then you can alter the database with simple Ruby statements.

For instance, you could create three rows in the table easily:

```ruby
Candy.create(:name => "Milky Way Midnight", :calories => 220)
Candy.create(:name => "Snickers", :calories => 550)
Candy.create(:name => "Reeeese's Peanut Batter Cups", :calories => 210)
```

Retrieving information is just as painless:

```ruby
reeses = Candy.find_by(:name => "Reeeese's Peanut Butter Cups")
# => #<Candy id: 3, name: "Reeeese's Peanut Batter Cups", calories: 210>
Candy.first
# => #<Candy id: 1, name: "Mikly Way Midnight", calories: 220>
snickers = Candy.find(2)
# => #<Candy id: 2, name: "Snickers", calories: 550>
```

As is viewing attributes:

```ruby
reeses = Candy.find(3)
# => #<Candy id: 3, name: "Reeeese's Peanut Batter Cups", calories: 210>
reeses.calories
# => 210
reeses.name
# => "Reeeese's Peanut Batter Cups"
```

Updating information and viewing table info is also quite simple:

```ruby
snickers = Candy.find(2)
# => #<Candy id: 2, name: "Snickers", calories: 550>
snickers.update(:calories => 250)
# => true

reeses = Candy.last
# => #<Candy id: 3, name: "Reeeese's Peanut Batter Cups", calories: 210>
reeses.update(:name => "Reese's Peanut Butter Cups")
# => true

Candy.find(2)
# => #<Candy id: 2, name: "Snickers", calories: 250>
Candy.last
# => #<Candy id: 3, name: "Reese's Peanut Butter Cups", calories: 210>
```

Isn't that amazing? Twelve lines of code allows you to create a table and a class that interact with each other elegantly and efficiently. It builds out methods like, `create`, `update`, `count`, `name`, `calories`, along with others such as `build` and `save`.

## Instructions

#### File Structure

You will only be altering code in six files, the three files in the `models` folder and the three files in the `db/migrations` folder.

```
├── app
│   └── models
│       ├── costume.rb
│       ├── costume_store.rb
│       └── haunted_house.rb
└──db
    └── migrations
        ├── 001_create_costumes.rb
        ├── 002_create_costume_stores.rb
        └── 003_create_haunted_houses.rb
```

#### Getting Started

**This is a test-driven lab so start with the first test and work your way down.**

**Your models should be no longer than two lines of code.**

* The first step is to run `bundle install`.
* Create the Costume class in `app/models/`.
* Fill out the ActiveRecord migration for costumes such that it passes the specs.
* Create the CostumeStore class in `app/models/`.
* Fill out the ActiveRecord migration such that it `costume_stores` the specs.
* Create the HauntedHouse class in `app/models/`.
* Fill out the ActiveRecord migration for haunted_houses such that it passes the specs.
* Remember to run `rake db:migrate` every time you create a migration. 
* Just like for any other lab, run `rspec` to view your progress.

## Resources
* [ActiveRecord Migrations](http://guides.rubyonrails.org/migrations.html)
  * Just look at the code for the example migrations
* [Creating Active Record Models](http://guides.rubyonrails.org/active_record_basics.html#creating-active-record-models) 
* [Timestamps](http://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveRecord/Timestamp.html)
